
# Follow-up - 17 August 2021

I write a follow-up whenever I said stuff, or put stuff on the
board that emerged during a session. I upload it to GitHub where
you can comment, ask further, remind me of something I promised
and forgot, or raise any other issue. This may show up in the
weekly tests (and then also in the final exam, which is sourced
from the tests). I'll demonstrate GitHub and how to work it in the
first week.

Don't worry about the amount (or type) of information contained
herein: I write these things up partly for myself, and partly for
those interested, but I don't expect you to learn or know them at
any point during this class. And I'll cease writing them up when I
run out of time, which I often do towards the end of term.

As part of your term project, you will come across a lot of new
technical terms. To sort through them, you'll need to create a
glossary. These follow-ups are my glossary for the course.

([Whiteboard](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1rTELJCyH9nvk4zynuzOyWztCVxWOwuta?usp=sharing))


## "Kabelsalat"

German for "cable spaghetti". No need to know that!


## [The Ising model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ising_model)

The model was actually developed at the University of Hamburg
where I studied physics, too. My [diploma (Master) thesis](http://www-library.desy.de/diss96.html) was
concerned with counting graphs on a 4-dimensional hypercubical
lattice. Such lattices can be used to simulate quantum field
theories. This was a pretty difficult time for me, partly for
personal, partly for professional reasons (I may say more in
class), and it also was a difficult political time (the Berlin
wall was opened that winter). The 4d Ising model has not been
solved analytically (neither has the 3d model).


## Social network analysis

This is an active area of research (cp. [Crane, 2018](#orgb36174c)). It is
linked to a number of different mathematical and computational
disciplines, like graph theory (e.g. to classify and count the
number of nodes and connections in a network), probability theory
(esp. combinatorics and statistics), and databases (to store
network information, much of which is unstructured, one can use
so-called graph databases like [`neo4j`](https://neo4j.com/sandbox/)). Social networks are
especially intriguing because of the rich interactions between
network members (compared to e.g. a parallel computing network),
and because of the Big Data that are generated. 


## Parametrization

We briefly discussed a paper called "Predicting Tie Strength With
Social Media" ([Gilbert and Karahalios, 2009](#orgfa0c376)). I recommend that you
take a look at this paper - it's relevant and readable even for
beginners. When reading research papers, keep my FAQ "[How should
you read?](https://github.com/birkenkrahe/org/blob/master/FAQ.md#org1c34cd3)" in mind. The paper parametrizes social media data for
analysis: this means that the researchers identified many
different variables in order to characterize tie strength. The ACM
website for the article also comes with a [video](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1518701.1518736) of the original
presentation of the paper - worth checking out for curiosity!


## Incubator

An incubator is a place to grow startup businesses. It can be run
by, or near a school or business - e.g. in the case of my last
university, the incubator was housed in a large old factory
building owned by SIEMENS and supported by it. Startups are like
hatchlings, they need a lot of tender love and care to make it
(and most don't nevertheless, in fact) - and money, usually
provided by venture capitalists. Marc Andreessen is one of the
most influential venture capitalists - he was also one of the
creators of the first web browser ([Mosaic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosaic_(web_browser)) - then a start-up, or
rather a spin-off, of a National computing center in Illinois).


## Agile methods

"Kanban" is the Japanese word for "sign". It stands for a simple
"agile" method (in the technical sense) of organizing tasks on a
board using post-its or other means. An app that implements the
Kanban principle for private users is Trello. Kanban boards -
often analog rather than digital - are common in production
(e.g. to keep an overview of warehouse stock). In the course, you
will use the agile method "Scrum" for your project work. Agile
methods are widely used in industry and software engineering.


## Multigrid methods

Many physical systems exhibit symmetries - this means that under
symmetry operations, the system behaves invariantly (it does not
change). Imagine a vector in 2d-space: it is invariant against
any non-rotational movements: length and angle remain the
same. Symmetry operations often form mathematical groups. One of
these groups is the renormalization group (RG). It is used in
quantum field theory to describe the scaling behavior of quantum
fields. Recently, it has also be used in connection with [neural
nets and machine learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.06157). But to exploit these symmetries for
large-scale numerical computations requires algorithmic tricks -
the multigrid is one such trick - this is what I was researching
for my PhD in computational mathematical particle physics. I was
also taking care of a [virtual library](https://www.desy.de/user/projects/MG.html) for the development of
these algorithms.


## Somatization

This stands for the human ability to express mental and emotional
issues through the body. I gave an example from my own career that
also lead me to coaching (because, as a young, inexperienced,
nerdy team leader, I needed it), to psychotherapy. Psychotherapy
is bigger than coaching, and usually reserved for the mentally
challenged. Frankly, it's too difficult for me - coaching is
not. Nevertheless, I trained in a few therapeutic disciplines,
like Gestalt therapy, Psychodrama, and Client-centered therapy. 


## Gestalt

"Gestalt" is the German word for "shape". It refers to what you're
focusing on, e.g. when looking at [this image](http://www.myorganisationalbehaviour.com/wp-content/uploads/gestalt-figure-ground.jpg): you either see the
candelaber, or two heads opposite each other. In class, we looked
at [this classic Gestalt image](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/83/3f/34/833f346d8f26cc0f77417e4a97f49bce.jpg) of two women. In therapy, you can
use Gestalt as a systemic principle (that's an important concept
for another post or even a lecture) to address people's issues
when these issues are obstructed by other issues of little
importance (much like one image is obstructed by the other). Short
story: in life, as in computing or math, success often depends on
what you focus on!


## Scenario method

This is an important method (in strategic planning) that I may
present in class, and then we may also do some exercises on
it. For now, I only drew two orthogonal axes - soft vs. hard
problems, and liberal arts vs. STEM solutions. Depending on the
problem/solution pair, you can now place prominent problems in a
quadrant. For example, the "consciousness" problem is a soft
problem, because consciousness is not (yet) a measurable quality
(not even as a binary quality - we don't know if animals are
conscious, or not, though some of them, think of dolphins, seem
that way). It is addressed more often than not by fields in the
liberal arts, e.g. psychology. "Commerce" is also soft, in that it
is only indirectly measurable (if at all), and therefore hard to
plan, and it is addressed e.g. by machine learning methods, which
are STEM. However, all these big ticket items are in practice
tackled by interdisciplinary sciences - e.g. "business
informatics" (the field I taught in Germany) for commerce, or
"cognitive sciences" for consciousness. I only came up with this
on the day before our lecture, and I thought it would be fun to
show on the first day!


## References

<a id="orgb36174c"></a> [Crane H (2018). Probabilistic Foundations of
Statistical Network Analysis. Chapman and Hall (2018).](https://www.routledge.com/Probabilistic-Foundations-of-Statistical-Network-Analysis/Crane/p/book/9781138630154)

<a id="orgfa0c376"></a> [Gilbert E, Karahalios K (2009). Predicting Tie
Strength With Social Media. Proc. SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, April 2009: 211-220.](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wcohen/10-802/gilbert_etal_chi2009_relationshipstrength.pdf)

