
# Followup September 7, 2021

[[Whiteboards](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1RRCxbq-3j3kj6KqGoYFOEN6CxlXYkSDj?usp=sharing)]

I enjoyed our pair exercise on Tuesday. The question you worked on
was far from trivial - it was pretty complex. It was also a "meta"
question that was hiding a many-model approach: the question was
about one model (Scrum = agile project management), and used
another model (3P = people, product, process). The 3P model is a
quality model, while Scrum is a project process model. The latter
is contained in the former, which makes the analysis tricky, and
accounts for the fact that you had difficulty filling in the
"process" column. This only occurred to me just now: in fact, I
should have started with a simpler question!


## People + Product + Process = Profits?

Though quality management is an old hat, the 3P model is still
used a lot, especially by startups. Here is a recent article
([Penner, 2021](#org0aa0368)) that argues for putting "profits" after the 3P when
building companies. Now, maintaining companies (especially large
ones, which is what I know something of) is quite different from
building (small) companies aka startups. Still, all points of view
are interesting, and this article (like many similar ones)
operates with different models - e.g. a "learning loop"model, a
people performance model, a motivation model (SCARF), and a
management model ("Rapid Adaptive Management").


## Efficiency vs. Resilience

This is another big topic, especially in sofware engineering. I
mentioned an article I had read that morning ([Vardi, 2021](#org4904a59)). The
title contains the conclusion: "Engineers and economists prize
efficiency, but nature favors resilience – lessons from Texas,
COVID-19 and the 737 Max". I am not entirely sure that it is fair
to pitch efficiency against resilience. Several of the comments on
the article make a similar point. Still, the examples seem well
chosen, though especially regarding COVID, the data are sparse.

I'm passing this on but I will have to brood over the article for
a little longer myself. In information systems design, resilience
is an important factor, as is efficiency - but both are compound
qualities, and not directly measurable. 

Whenever a quality is not directly measureable, bias must be
watched extra carefully, because this bias enters the definition
of the metrics. 


## References

<a id="org0aa0368"></a> Penner J (18 Feb 2021). First People, then Process,
Product = Profits [Blog]. [Online: medium.com](https://medium.com/the-soul-of-startups/first-people-then-process-product-profits-e1a20ed34189). ([GDrive Copy](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1s27CGxaQTOPe5gXOSgKoZOp-WgAbs2M2/view?usp=sharing))

<a id="org4904a59"></a> Vardi MY (18 May 2021). Engineers and economists prize
efficiency, but nature favors resilience – lessons from Texas,
COVID-19 and the 737 Max [Blog]. [Online: theconversation.com](https://theconversation.com/engineers-and-economists-prize-efficiency-but-nature-favors-resilience-lessons-from-texas-covid-19-and-the-737-max-152670).

