#+TITLE:Fall 2021 courses
#+AUTHOR:Marcus Birkenkrahe
#+SUBTITLE:Fall 2021 courses
#+reveal_theme: black
#+reveal_init_options: transition:'cube'
#+OPTIONS: toc:nil num:nil fig:nil
* DSC 101 Data science tools and methods
** Data science entry test

   [[https://lyon.schoology.com/assignment/5178181812][Schoology]]

*** Description

    This is an entry quiz to see what you already know (if anything) about
    data science! This course assumes no prior knowledge - the quiz only
    for me to find out what you already know, and to assess your progress
    over the entire course. Don't worry if you cannot answer any of the
    questions - all of this will be taught in the course! Enjoy, and ask
    if anything is unclear!

    - Questions have one or more correct answers.
    - Partial credit is allowed.
    - Questions are not timed.

*** Quiz Q&A
**** What is the purpose of data science?
**** Which of these are skills that data scientists really need?
**** Which of these things have to do with data science?
**** What is R (in data science)?
     - Statistical correlation coefficient
     - Statistical programming language (+)
     - Successor to the S language (+)
     - Companion package to SQL

**** R is the 14th most popular programming language (according to the TIOBE ranking, August 2021)
     - TRUE (+)
     - FALSE

**** Which language is used to query relational databases?
     - SQL (+)
     - C#
     - R
     - MySQL

**** What is the logarithm with base 10 of 1000?
     - ~0.03x10^2~ (+)
     - ~2~
     - ~10**3~
     - ~3~ (+)

**** What is $e^{ln(2.71)}$?
     - $e\approx 2.71$ (+)
     - $ln(e)$
     - $ln(e^{2,71})$ (+)
     - $e{2.71}$

**** Which of these numbers is $= 0.134 \times 10^{-6}$?
     - $1.34$
     - $134,000,000$
     - $\frac{1.34}{10000}
     - $134\times 10^{-9}$ (+)

**** Which of these equations is for a line with the same slope as $y = -3x + 2$? (More than one answer is correct.)
     - $y=-3x-8$ (+)
     - $y=8x - 3$
     - $y=5x+2$
     - $2y = -6x + 4$ (+)

**** What is the "Git" in "GitHub"?
     - The British word for "big dummy"
     - The German word for "grid" (in German: "Gitter")
     - The version control system created by Linus Torvalds (+)
     - From G[NU] I[s] T[errific]

**** What does "literate programming" stand for?
     - Programming for fiction writers
     - A programming paradigm of combining documentation and source code (+)
     - A programming method to improve readability of code (+)
     - A structured database querying language style

**** What type of plot is shown in the picture?

     #+attr_html: :width 600px
     [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/dsc101/admin/img/entryquiz_hist.png]]

     - Boxplot
     - Heatmap
     - Scatterplot
     - Histogram (+)

**** This code prints the reciprocal of ~a~, unless ~a = 0~.

     #+attr_html: :width 600px
     [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/dsc101/admin/img/entryquiz_code.png]]

     - TRUE (+)
     - FALSE

**** What is a Euclidean vector?

     - An arrow in space
     - A geometric object with an angle in the plane
     - A geometric object with a magnitude and direction (+)
     - An n-tuple of elements

**** ~(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE)~ is a vector of string values

     - TRUE
     - FALSE (+)

**** What kind are the variables on the x axis in the picture?

     #+attr_html: :width 600px
     [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/dsc101/admin/img/entryquiz_categorical.png]]

     - Numerical variables
     - Categorical variables (+)
     - Logical variables
     - ~NaN~ ("Not a Number")

**** How efficient is this data presentation?
     - Efficient, because of the color scheme
     - Not efficient - hard to compare both charts (+)
     - Depends on the observer
     - Wrong question - efficiency is not relevant

**** Smoothed density plots (see figure) are based on assumptions about the underlying dataset.

     #+attr_html: :width 600px
     [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/dsc101/admin/img/entryquiz_density.png]]

     - TRUE (+)
     - FALSE

**** Which of these aspects influence effectiveness of a data visualization?
     - Aesthetics (e.g. color) (+)
     - Scaling (e.g. logarithmic) (+)
     - Geometry (e.g. plot type) (+)
     - Data (e.g. choice of variables) (+)

** Follow-up 17 Aug

   Hey, I really enjoyed today's class, I hope you did, too.

   I write a follow-up whenever I said stuff, or put stuff on the
   board that emerged during a session. This is uploaded to GitHub
   where you can comment, ask further, remind me of something I
   promised and forgot, or raise any other issue. This may show up in
   the weekly tests (and then also in the final exam, which is
   sourced from the tests).

   Don't worry about the amount (or type) of information contained
   herein: I write these things up partly for myself, and partly for
   those interested, but I don't expect you to learn or know them at
   any point during this class. And I'll cease writing them up when I
   run out of time, which I often do towards the end of term.

   As part of your term project, you will come across a lot of new
   technical terms. To sort through them, you'll need to create a
   glossary. These follow-ups are my glossary for the course.

   ([[https://drive.google.com/file/d/14GruRbuXnLwofI_6nj8yIAC8P6atYD8I/view?usp=sharing][Whiteboard]])

*** Agile methods
    "Kanban" is the Japanese word for "sign". It stands for a simple
    "agile" method (in the technical sense) of organizing tasks on a
    board using post-its or other means. An app that implements the
    Kanban principle for private users is Trello. Kanban boards -
    often analog rather than digital - are common in production
    (e.g. to keep an overview of warehouse stock). In the course, you
    will use the agile method "Scrum" for your project work. Agile
    methods are widely used in industry and software engineering.
*** LaTeX and TeX
    Gold standard of Open Source text formatting and font systems
    (there is another one just for fonts called Metafont). Created by
    Donald Knuth from Stanford U. who is also the author of the
    seminal "The Art of Computer Programming" ([[knuth11][Knuth, 2011]]), usually
    abbreviated to [[https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/taocp.html][TAOCP]]. As soon as my boat has arrived from Europe,
    you should take a look at these books, which are mainly about
    algorithms, fairly mathematical, voluminous (10,000 pages) and
    difficult (Bill Gates is rumored to have offered a job at
    Microsoft for anyone who read the whole series). For the book,
    Knuth created an artificial assembly language, MIX, which runs on
    a hypothetical MIX computer. A little like like pseudocode.

*** Git and Linux
    The Linux kernel and the version control program were both
    created by Finnish-American computer programmer Linus
    Torvalds. The connection: Linux is one of the largest (if not the
    largest) open source project. I'll be teaching operating systems
    in Spring 2022, and Linux will figure prominently in that
    course. Git is the software used for the GitHub developers'
    platform (and many other similar platforms, like GitLab,
    BitBucket, SourceForge etc.)

*** Emacs editor
    You're going to hear, and see, enough of this "extensible text
    editor" written in Lisp (one of the oldest functional programming
    languages). Emacs is a great Integrated Development Environment
    (IDE), and much more than that. I use it as an IDE for R in
    connection with the Emacs Speaks Statistics (~ESS~) package, but
    I also use the Org-mode package for all my note taking and task
    management, and as an alternative to the interactive Jupyter
    notebook. Notebooks are an example of Literate Programming,
    another invention of Donald Knuth's.

*** Big Data
    We discussed the meaning of the "3V" definition of big data -
    volume (of the data, usually these days no less than 1 petabyte =
    1 million gigabyte), velocity (speed at which data are streamed
    and, if possible, processed in real time), and variety (the many
    different types and formats of data - audio, video and text). All
    of these can be measured and controlled fairly well - if they can
    be stored, used etc. is a matter of data wrangling (usually the
    most laborious part of the data scientist's work). There are other
    definitions, up to "5V", including "value" (to a beneficiary,
    e.g. a company collecting the data), and "veracity" (which relates
    to data quality - an issue of growing importance). Value and
    veracity are harder to measure directly, which is why I don't
    usually included them in my Big Data definition.
*** Afterword
    I usually pepper the follow-ups with links and articles, but I'm
    tired, and I still have another syllabus to write and a lecture
    to prepare so I'll leave this job to you!

    In our second session later this week, I'll finish the course
    overview and I'll introduce you to the GitHub and DataCamp
    platforms. That'll do for the start!

*** References

    <<knuth11>> [[https://www.amazon.com/Computer-Programming-Volumes-1-4A-Boxed/dp/0321751043][Knuth, D (2011). The Art of Computer
    Programming. CA: Addison-Wesley.]]

** Follow-up 19 Aug

   ([[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/18vQJNIoLDSlADEF1tu5pwuHUVwVq6Xay?usp=sharing][Whiteboards]])

*** Remember words and know concepts

    It may sound trivial and/or tedious to you, but knowing concepts
    and terms, and remembering them is better than having to look them
    up. Being able to look them up is, of course, better than not
    being able to do even that. Learning anything also consists of
    learning a certain number of technical terms. You've probably been
    brought up with Google search, instead of having to go to a book
    shelf or a library, or having to ask a real person. But Google
    does not replace own knowledge - information that you own, and
    that you know you own because you don't have to think twice if
    someone asks you. It is true that there is much less to learn by
    heart in STEM than, say, in poetry, or even in the life sciences
    or medicine. And in future, AI will likely be able to help you
    even more with remembering stuff. But core technical terms and
    concepts aren't just "stuff", they are like scaffold of ideas
    around which the regular stuff is only draped. One of my jobs as a
    teacher is to help you separate the stuff from the scaffold.

    For your presentation, projects, and all that, you need to do some
    semblance of research. When you do that, you should build a
    glossary of terms - definitions that you ideally craft
    yourself. You can also use these definitions in your writing and
    presenting (in other words: a good glossary is a valid research
    result). In fact, Wikipedia is nothing but a giant glossary.

    This is a long explanation why, at the start of a session, I ask
    you if you remember any words or concepts or ideas from the last
    session, and this challenge will also enter the weekly tests that
    you write in class to get back into the topic.

*** Markup and Markdown
    The standard format of text documents on GitHub is markdown. This
    is similar but different from markup language (like HTML). Both
    are formatting languages. HTML (markup) has evolved into HTML5
    (for interactive web pages) and XML (for industrial data
    transfer). Markdown is much simpler but the concept is the same as
    for markup: separation of content and formatting so that you have
    your head free for content and don't have to worry about
    formatting at the same time (which is the WYSIWIG, or What You See
    Is What You Get, concept of WORD and other text processing
    programs).
*** DataCamp
    DataCamp is a training platform specialising on data science in
    three languages, R, Python and SQL, as well as utilities and
    productivity tools (like Git, Shell, etc.). DataCamp has an
    interesting blog with tutorials, webinars, assessments, and
    more. I've used it as a training platform to supplement my
    teaching since a couple of years. The academic alliance with
    DataCamp is worth US$ 300 per year. During your membership, you
    can do any number of courses and earn certificates, which you can
    then e.g. display on your web pages or add to your resume. For
    this course, you are assigned 15 different chapters from different
    DataCamp courses, about one every week. Each chapter will take
    15-30 minutes to complete. You must complete 50% or at least 8
    chapters on time to pass the course. The content is roughly in
    line with the classroom instruction.
*** Laptops in class
    If you don't have a laptop or don't want or can't bring one to
    class, you should come in time to get a lab PC. An own laptop is
    not always necessary, but always useful. If there are not enough
    PC places, you may have to work in pairs on one machine. Having a
    computer to type on is important because your hands develop muscle
    memory - for the same reason you should always type instructions
    yourself and not cut and paste. From week 2 onwards, we'll program
    pretty much every time, so you'll be busy typing.

*** References

    In this course, references must be consistent and complete. You're
    of course used to that from your liberal arts courses. Consistency
    means that you pick one citation style (I don't care which one) -
    e.g. [[https://apastyle.apa.org/][APA]]. If you use bibliographic software (like Mendeley, or
    Citavi, or Zotero), the software will help you pick a style and
    maintain consistency. Completeness means that every reference (no
    matter if you reference a personal communication, a blog, a book,
    an article, a web page, an image etc.) must have: author, date,
    title and place of publication (no matter if any of these are
    missing - then you should indicate that they're missing). A URL or
    link is not a complete reference (in fact, it's nothing, certainly
    not a place of publication). Partly because you're also liberal
    arts people, I pull no punches in this area and I'll mercilessly
    mark you down for violations of this rule ("consistency and
    completeness"), which may appear formal to you, but which is super
    important, especially in our times of relentless abuse and
    ignorance of intellectual property rights! End of rant!

** Msg Isaiah Bradford (21 Aug)

   Hi Isaiah,

   I hope you are well. We've completed the first week pretty much
   only with orientation. If you accept my invitation to GitHub, you
   can look at the Syllabus, the orientiation presentation and the
   follow-up documents.

   Please play the "Entry Quiz" which you'll find in Schoology at your
   earliest convenience - this won't take more than 20 minutes.

   Also, please use the Datacamp registration link to register with
   DataCamp and try to complete the first assignment "Intro to
   Basics". You find the link to the assignments in your DataCamp
   dashboard. This is a really easy assignment that shouldn't take you
   more than 20 min either.

   Let me know if you have trouble with any of these. There'll also be
   another short test at the beginning of the next session (I do this
   every week).

   Do you think you'll be back next week? Cheers and have a good
   weekend, MB

   PS. you should probably bring a laptop to class on Thu next week,
   since we'll install R on it. If you don't have a laptop, make sure
   you come early enough to get a lab PC.

** Test 1 (week 2 / session 3 / 24 Aug)

   This test starts our series of weekly quizzes. The content is based
   on content covered in classroom sessions and/or
   assignments. Questions may be recycled for the final exam.

   * Questions may have more than one correct answer
   * You can play the quiz as often as you wish
   * You can review and change your answers before submission
   * Tests are disabled during the final exam

*** What will you have to do to pass this course?
    * Present a team project (marked > 50%) (+)
    * Complete > 50% of the DataCamp assignments (+)
    * Answer a Frequently Asked Question (FAQ)
    * Participate in class discussions
    * Pass the weekly tests (> 50%) (+)
    * Complete final exam (> 50%) (+)
    * Build a data science web site
    * Answer at least one question per session correctly
    * Write a diary entry per week
*** What is a burndown chart?
    - An important Scrum tool (+)
    - A chart that shows the remaining work in an agile project (+)
    - A chart that shows the time spent on project tasks
    - A chart that shows remaining story points (+)
    - A spreadsheet for agile projects (agile Gantt chart)
*** A Kanban board is a tool for distributed task management
    - True (+)
    - False
*** What is the 3V definition of Big Data?
    - Value, Veracity, Velocity
    - Volume, Velocity, Variety (+)
    - Volume, Value, Variety
    - Value, Velocity, Volume
    - Variety, Volume, Veracity
*** What does DataCamp have to offer?
    - Courses in R, Python and SQL (+)
    - Data science projects (+)
    - Data science consulting
    - Webinars (+)
    - Data science course certificates (+)
    - Assessments (+)
    - Data science job fair
    - Community blog (+)
    - Skill tracks (+)

** Week 2 - 24 August

   #+attr_html: :height 300px
   [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/img/bean.gif]]

   * Housekeeping
   * Data science overview
   * Getting started with R
   * Next week: projects!

*** Housekeeping

    * First weekly test ([[https://lyon.schoology.com/assignment/5226632989/assessment_questions][Schoology]])
    * Weekly assignment ([[https://learn.datacamp.com/courses/free-introduction-to-r][DataCamp]])
    * Delayed Schedule ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/dsc101/blob/main/syllabus.md#schedule-and-session-content][GitHub]])
    * FAQ: text books ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/dsc101/blob/main/FAQ.md#org052193d][GitHub]])
    * Term Diary ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/org/blob/master/diary.md#org3b0dc9e][GitHub]])
    * Questions?

** Follow-up 24 Aug 2021

   [[[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1BR3QJVUojP2oVRe_zPxPbPVwH4k1vfNd?usp=sharing][Whiteboard photos here]]]

*** TODO Reading assignment (by Thu 26 Aug, 1 PM)

    Please read the seminal [[https://1drv.ms/b/s!AhEvK3qWokrvhsVoCA7lL4i7m16ElQ][article by Davenport and Patil (2012)]] until
    Thursday - it's not difficult. Write down any questions you may
    have. What do you think has changed (if anything) since 2012?

*** Programming languages

    Here is the admittedly rather obscure 1966 article ([[landin66][Landin, 1966]])
    that begins with the existence of 700 programming languages
    ("1,700 special programming languages [...] in over 700
    application areas"), and proposes a language generation framework
    centered on so-called "primitives"[fn:5]. Wikipedia ([[wiki21][2021]]) lists around
    300 "notable languages" today - another author reports that the
    HOPL list counts 8,945 languages. This includes minor ones,
    completely esoteric languages, dialects (e.g. Python 2 and Python
    3), and markup languages. Given the number of natural languages
    that were spoken or written at some time - 7,099 according to
    [[https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/how-many-languages-are-there-in-the-world.html][WorldAtlas]], 2,000 alone on the African continent ([[michaels19][Michaels,
    2019]]) - this isn't surprising.

*** Video recording

    A video recording of the "data science overview" lecture is
    [[https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6SfZh1-kWXk4Fg0V1zLj9xmoOo6P1Oq0][available via YouTube]]. Ca. 60 min, recorded in October 2020. The
    background is our Berlin apartment (now sold).

*** Podcast

    I mentioned the data science career book by Nolis and Robinson
    ([[career20][Manning, 2020]]). Their first podcast episode (done to promote the
    book) is called "[[https://podcasts.google.com/feed/aHR0cHM6Ly9hbmNob3IuZm0vcy8zMGQ3ZDlmMC9wb2RjYXN0L3Jzcw/episode/OThhN2RmN2MtNmFhMy00YmVlLTlmYjEtYjViN2ZhN2RjYjQx?sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj-ssv-5K7sAhWW0oUKHSitB8YQkfYCegQIARAF][What is Data Science?]]".

*** References

    <<hauser14>> Hauser et al (2014). The mystery of language
    evolution. In:
    Front. Pschol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00401

    <<landin66>> [[https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~crary/819-f09/Landin66.pdf][Landin PJ (1966). The Next 700 Programming
    Languages. In: Communications of the ACM 9(3):157-166.]]

    <<michaels19>> [[https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/how-many-languages-are-there-in-the-world.html][Michaels S (3 June 2019). How Many Languages Are
    There In The World? [Website]. Online: worldatlas.com.]]

    <<wiki21>> [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_programming_languages][N.a. (19 Aug 2021). Liste of programming languages
    [Website]. Online: wikipedia.org.]]

    <<career20>> [[https://podcast.bestbook.cool/][Nolis J, Robinson E (2020). Build a Career in Data
    Science. Manning, 2020.]]

* DSC 482.01 Artificial Intelligence
** Follow-up 18 August 2021

   I write a follow-up whenever I said stuff, or put stuff on the
   board that emerged during a session. I upload it to GitHub where
   you can comment, ask further, remind me of something I promised and
   forgot, or raise any other issue. This may show up in the weekly
   tests (and then also in the final exam, which is sourced from the
   tests). I'll demonstrate GitHub and how to work with it in the
   first week.

   Don't worry about the amount (or type) of information contained
   herein: I write these things up partly for myself, and partly for
   those interested, but I don't expect you to learn or know them at
   any point during this class. And I'll cease writing them up when I
   run out of time, which I often do towards the end of term.

   As part of your term project, you will come across a lot of new
   technical terms. To sort through them, you'll need to create a
   glossary. These follow-ups are my glossary for the course.

   ([[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Klhy3muIH7_GwN4aNRjrTW5507l237Zo?usp=sharing][Whiteboard]])

*** On ignorance
    This relates to the sentence I put on the blackboard at the start
    (not actually a quote - or at least none I have ever heard):
    #+begin_quote
    "The ignorance of the teacher is the bliss of the student."
    #+end_quote
    I hope this didn't make me look too bad! There were several
    serious issues behind it: (1) I'm necessarily ignorant: data
    science is a vast, interdisciplinary field, overlapping to a large
    extent (certainly more than 50% though that does of course depend
    on one's definitions) with AI, which is another vast,
    interdisciplinary field. It would be very hard for a lecturer to
    know most about either of these, and harder even, to teach it to
    undergraduates in the course of one seminar (no matter how
    advanced). Instead, what you get is a foundation to move on if you
    wish. (2) If a teacher acts in good faith and does not pretend to
    know stuff he or she doesn't actually know, it's easier to go on a
    journey of discovery together. (3) There is this other saying (I
    don't know by whom, perhaps Confucius?): when the student is
    ready, the (right) teacher will appear. This is a little like that
    in that it's a paradox. Interestingly, paradoxa count as models,
    too. I should write an article or a diary post about this - (too)
    many thoughts are rushing in!
*** GitHub
    I'll introduce it in class, no need to say much about it
    here. GitHub is the premier hosting side of code for
    developers. There are many others. I use it for course
    documents. There is also a "GitHub classroom" site and application
    suite, but I haven't really looked at it much. If anyone knows
    more, let me know!
*** Time management
    Francesco Cirillo, the creator of the "Pomodoro" method ([[cirillo18][Cirillo,
    2018]]), is a good friend of mine (though an Italian, he lives and
    works in Berlin). I like this and other time management methods,
    but if you want to beat procrastination and bad (?) time
    management, look at it as "risk management": assess the risk of
    being late, or being on time, for every instance, hold it against
    the requirements of your character, your culture etc. Time
    management is not a matter of just the right recipe. Public
    discussions of this issue are often embarrassingly shallow and
    useless.
*** IMRaD
    IMRaD stands for Introduction + Method + Results + Discussion. It
    is the standard format for scientific publications. There is a
    little more to it, but not much: the proof lies in the pudding
    (the doing), not in the concept. I made a short video about it a
    little while back [[birkenkrahe16][(Birkenkrahe, 2016)]].
*** arxiv.org
    This is a preprint server - a place to upload and download
    scientific papers before they are properly published by a journal
    (print or online). There is also arxiv-sanity, an AI-driven app
    that selects papers for you based on profile and
    preferences. Check it out.
*** References
    <<birkenkrahe16>> [[https://youtu.be/dip7UwZ3wUM][Birkenkrahe, M (2016). Research Writing with
    IMRaD [Video]. Online: YouTube.]]

    <<cirillo18>> [[https://www.amazon.com/Pomodoro-Technique-Acclaimed-Time-Management-Transformed/dp/1524760706/][Cirillo, F (2018). The Pomodoro Technique. Currency.]]

** Follow-up 20 August 2021
*** Arxiv Sanity Preserver
    This is a follow-on from the last follow-up (18 August) where I
    mentioned arxiv-sanity. The site itself is a little hard to find -
    it's https://another-arxiv-sanity.site/. A good introduction is [[https://youtu.be/S2GY3gh6qC8][in
    this video]]. The creator, Andrej Karpathy, is the chief data
    scientist of Tesla Motors today. He came up with this
    in 2016. This site would be a suitable subject for a short
    presentation followed by a discussion. Identifying and searching
    through relevant research is a huge issue for any developer. I
    don't know if the code for Arxiv Sanity Preserver is public or if
    it is private, like Google's search engine. It would be a huge
    advantage to know the algorithm for result validation.
*** Data science
    I've mentioned it here and there - this AI seminar is part of
    Lyon's new data science program. I gave a high level definition of
    data science as an interdisciplinary field. It overlaps with (most
    of AI, in the form of machine learning, or ML), and requires
    skills in three areas: (1) maths and stats, (2) programming and
    computing, and (3) domain knowledge (i.e. deep knowledge of, or
    experience with, a practical application involving data in the
    real world). A quick survey revealed that seven of you were
    focused on (2), and two each on (1) and (3). Within this program,
    the current AI seminar will be followed by two other classes - (A)
    one focusing on hardware, e.g. involving IoT, the other (B) on
    software, on machine learning (statistics and algorithms). My
    spring 2022 classes DSC 201 (machine learning) and CSC 420
    (operating systems) will address these.
*** Consciousness
    This is one of the perennial problems of the search for AGI,
    Artificial General Intelligence. In the session, I mentioned a
    recent discovery - a talk by mathematical physicist Sir Roger
    Penrose on consciousness and physics ([[penrose17][The Artificial Intelligence
    Channel, 2017]]). This is about a very limited aspect of
    consciousness, namely understanding mathematical
    things. Fascinating talk by one of the great minds of our time.
*** Agile management
    The projects in all my courses use the agile management method
    Scrum. Rather than introduce this in the abstract, we will
    practice it. The curve on the whiteboard showed my ambition for
    you: you should have about equal workload and enthusiasm
    throughout the term, and finish early, before finals take your
    breath and energy away. The other aspect of Scrum that is really
    important is customer dialogue. In this course, you have to create
    an application (ideally in a small team), and I'll play your
    customer (or project owner, in Scrum speech).
*** The Internet of Things
    IoT is the name for a network of machines. They are often small,
    with little processing power, like a micro controller, but strong
    in large numbers. There's even a "[[https://makerfreedom.com/what-is-the-maker-movement-5-things-you-should-know/][maker movement]]" ([[powell20][Powell, 2020]]) -
    very popular in Europe - that focuses mainly on these small
    devices and uses them to demonstrate and teach computing at the
    hardware level (device examples are: BBC micro:bit, Raspberry Pi,
    Arduino). I've got a couple of these with whom I've played - this
    will also have a place in my operating systems course (CSC
    420). For our seminar, it is important that IoT is increasingly
    acquiring AI, or more specifically, ANI (Artificial Narrow
    Intelligence, as opposed to AGI, or Artificial General,
    i.e. human, intelligence). AGI is a continuation of the past
    interest in AI, while ANI has become popular only relatively
    recently, but dominates the field nowadays (e.g. in the form of
    "deep learning" applications, deeply layered neural networks).

*** Swarm intelligence
    The idea that a very large number of individually stupid devices
    or entities, when networked, can attain intelligence, has
    intrigued thinkers for decades. One of them is the Pole [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanis%C5%82aw_Lem][Stanislaw
    Lem]] (coincidentally, the Polish Parliament has declared 2021 the
    Stanislaw Lem year), a philosopher and science fiction writer. Two
    of his books are "[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(novel)][Solaris]]", about a thinking ocean that covers an
    entire water planet, and "[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Invincible][The Invincible]]" that describes how
    nanobots defeat an invincible spaceship. Look for Lem's writing,
    he's a clever classic. "Solaris" was also filmed by the visionary
    Russian director Tarkovsky (and there's a US remake with George
    Clooney, too).
*** References

    In this course, references must be consistent and complete. You're
    of course used to that from your liberal arts courses. Consistency
    means that you pick one citation style (I don't care which one) -
    e.g. [[https://apastyle.apa.org/][APA]]. If you use bibliographic software (like Mendeley, or
    Citavi, or Zotero), the software will help you pick a style and
    maintain consistency. Completeness means that every reference (no
    matter if you reference a personal communication, a blog, a book,
    an article, a web page, an image etc.) must have: author, date,
    title and place of publication (no matter if any of these are
    missing - then you should indicate that they're missing). A URL or
    link is not a complete reference (in fact, it's nothing, certainly
    not a place of publication). Partly because you're also liberal
    arts people, I pull no punches in this area and I'll mercilessly
    mark you down for violations of this rule ("consistency and
    completeness"), which may appear formal to you, but which is super
    important, especially in our times of relentless abuse and
    ignorance of intellectual property rights! End of rant!

    <<penrose17>> [[https://youtu.be/h_VeDKVG7e0][The Artificial Intelligence Channel (5 Sep
    2017). Sir Roger Penrose - How can Consciousness Arise Within the
    Laws of Physics? Online]]

    <<powell20>> [[https://makerfreedom.com/what-is-the-maker-movement-5-things-you-should-know/][Powell B (16 Jan 2020). What is the Maker Movement? 5
    Things You Should Know [blog]. Online: makerfreedom.com.]]

** Discussion 21 August (pick dates)

   As discussed in class, we must fill the schedule for protocols and
   presentations. Let me know in the forum if you encounter any
   difficulty.

*** Enter your own name in the schedule

    I have uploaded a file "[[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/schedule.md][schedule.md]]" where you can enter your
    presentation/protocol dates directly (link below). To do this,
    open the file for editing (click on the little pen in the upper
    right corner). The markdown (.md) file in this case is pure
    HTML. Find one of the strings "Session Protocol X" and
    "Presentation Y" and replace them with your name. Click "Preview"
    before saving to check. To save, go to the bottom of the page and
    click on "Commit changes"[fn:1]. Schedule session protocol dates
    marked "X" (for extra credit) only *after* you scheduled your
    regular protocol session.

*** What should you present?

    There is a new FAQ "[[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/FAQ.md#org9a7b6e4][Can we use any AI application for our
    presentation?]]" based on Hakeem's question (that's a point for
    participation, Hakeem!) This may help you decide what/when to
    do. If in doubt, ask here and/or ask in class. Instead of
    peppering the FAQ with potential Q&A that nobody ever reads (in my
    experience), I'll wait for your questions.

*** AI project

    The AI application project ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/syllabus.md][see syllabus]]) for which we use Scrum
    is a team project - 2-3 people should work on an application
    together. The protocol and the presentation on the other hand, are
    individual assignments.

** Msg 21 August (pick dates)[[https://lyon.schoology.com/link?a=1954606109&path=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbirkenkrahe%2Fai482%2Fdiscussions%2F2][(Schoology)]]

   Hi! Please take a look at my announcement in GitHub and register
   for a protocol and a presentation. I've also uploaded the 2nd
   follow-up document for last week. These follow-ups are similar to
   the type of protocol that I envision you creating after a
   session. If you haven't signed up until we meet again on Tuesday
   Aug 24, I'll schedule you myself. Notice that we need someone for
   August 25 already.Cheers, MB

   PS. I have not used GitHub discussion forums before - I haven't
   figured out how to turn email notification on for new forum msg. If
   anyone figures it out: let us know!

** Test 1 (week 2 / session 3 / 23 Aug)

   This test starts our series of weekly quizzes. The content will
   always be based on content covered in classroom sessions and/or
   assignments. In this class, the tests are not part of your grade.

*** What will you have to do to pass this course?
    * Give a presentation (marked > 50%) (+)
    * Propose an AI application (marked > 50%) (+)
    * Write at least one session protocol (+)
    * Write at least two session protocols
    * Participate in class discussions (+)
    * Answer at least one question per session correctly
    * Engage with the course topic
    * Write a diary entry per week
    * Answer a Frequently Asked Question (FAQ)
*** Where can you get AI preprints?
    - arxiv.org (+)
    - scholar.google.com (+)
    - researchgate.net (+)
    - schoology.net
    - google.com (+)
    - any scientific publisher's site
*** Which areas of knowledge are relevant to AI as a part of Data Science?
    - Domain knowledge ("Know how") (+)
    - Domestic knowledge ("Know where")
    - Mathematics and statistics (+)
    - Programming and computing (+)
    - Biostatistics
    - Autonomous cars
*** AI in data science is mostly concerned with "machine learning".
    - TRUE (+)
    - FALSE
*** What does ANI (Artificial Narrow Intelligence) refer to?
    - A subset of the entire field of AI (+)
    - Artificial superintelligence (machines that are smarter than humans)
    - Automatic performance of single, simple tasks by a computer (+)
    - Many AI applications in the area of IoT (+)
    - ANI includes Robotic Process Automation (RPA) tasks (+)

** Week 2, 23 Aug
*** Housekeeping
**** Test
**** Scheduling
*** [[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/2_what_is_ai/2_what_is_ai.pdf][Lecture: What is AI?]]
*** Group exercise: what is intelligence?
    Results (whiteboard photos)

*** Protocol (Aug 23, 2021) [[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/2_what_is_ai/protocol_23_aug.md][(GitHub)]]

    By Marcus Birkenkrahe (MB) aka "The professor"

    This was the 2nd week of the course, and the first week with
    content other than just orientation.

**** Sources
     * [[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/19VyEQQaN7JzbsS-6NFvboDQm4FPFrpQk?usp=sharing][Whiteboards]]
     * [[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/2_what_is_ai/2_what_is_ai.md][Lecture on GitHub]]
     * [[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/16zu61TE3XXSDPK5H0ls5Hmb-xPXp-qnZ?usp=sharing][AIMA chapter 1.1]]

**** Housekeeping
***** First weekly test

      The [[https://lyon.schoology.com/course/5071626602/materials#!filter_type=assessments][test]] asked about "ANI" for "Artificial Narrow Intelligence",
      as opposed to "AGI" for "Artificial General Intelligence". Most
      of the practical AI that we see is AI. AGI, or machines that are
      (nearly) as intelligent as humans, does not really exist[fn:2].

      One can get preprints (and other research documents) from
      researchgate.net (here is [[https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Marcus-Birkenkrahe][MB's profile]]). Like arxiv.org, this
      site is not curated though, i.e. everyone can put their work
      there (without external validation)[fn:4].

      The question "Is AI in data science the same thing as Machine
      Learning (ML)?" was tricky, because this is ~TRUE~ for AI in
      data science, while for AI overall, ML is only a sub-field
      (though a dominant one at current).

      Students should let MB know if they find any mistakes in the
      tests.

***** Scheduling

      Students were supposed to schedule a protocol (like this one),
      and a presentation using this document in GitHub. Those who did
      not schedule themselves will be assigned a date by MB.

      MB said this was the first time that he had people write
      protocols, and that he was open to pretty much anything[fn:3].

***** Diary

      MB writes irregular diary entries on GitHub, one diary is for
      all courses, the other one only for this course. [[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/org/blob/master/diary.md#org5bbaf46][In his general
      diary]], he complained about having to teach masked students.

**** Session Topic: What is AI?

***** Career advice

      MB showed the home pages of the two authors of AIMA (2021), the
      main textbook for the course. One of them is Google's director
      of research, Peter Norvig. One way to establish a relationship
      with people like these is to look at their [[http://www.norvig.com/][publications]], and ask
      them questions - make contact via shared interests.

***** Pair exercise - What is intelligence?

      Students were supposed to develop definitions of "intelligence"
      and "artificial intelligence". MB did not offer any
      solution. Instead, he went through the 5 different attempts and
      analyzed each of them: he pointed out differences and
      similarities.

      Most definitions of AI boiled down to a form of human
      intelligence executed by a machine. Different forms of
      intelligence were mentioned: the ability to think abstractly,
      solve problems, adapt, and learn.

      Knowledge and information were distinguished. In "Knowledge
      Management", data, information, knowledge and wisdom can be seen
      as a ladder:

      |-------------|
      | Wisdom      |
      |-------------|
      | Knowledge   |
      |-------------|
      | Information |
      |-------------|
      | Data        |
      |-------------|

      According to [[weinberger2010][Weinberger (2010)]], this hierarchy goes back to the
      poem "The Rock" by T.S. Eliot. As the article points out, there
      are several issues with this hierarchy. It comes from a time
      when data wasn't supposed to be of much value, while today,
      "Data Is The New Oil" ([[forbes2019][Bhageshpur, 2019]]).

      MB asked if the students had thought of people, processes or
      products (a common framework in quality management and in
      [[penner2021][entrepreneurship]]) when coming up with the definitions, and all
      three approaches were represented.

***** Lecture

      One can approach big topics like AI from different angles:
      language (e.g. definitions, as in the group exercise);
      philosophy or history (classical liberal arts disciplines); or
      science. Science is useful when a quantitative treatment is
      possible (i.e. when there are observations that one can make and
      quantify or measure).

      The two opposing fundamental questions when looking at AI are:
      should we focus on humans, or should we focus on machines?
      Currently (perhaps because human intelligence is too hard to
      study and/or imitate), the focus is more strongly on machine
      intelligence.

      Four approaches can be identified:

      * AI that has human behavior (as in the 1985 film "Terminator")
      * AI that has human thought (as in the 2013 film "Her")
      * AI that has rational thought (as in the 1998 film "Pi")
      * AI that has rational behavior (as in the 2002 film "Minority
        Report")

**** Summary view

     I liked the group exercise as an opportunity to interact, get up
     and do something (instead of just being talked at). I thought it
     was interesting how many different definitions of "intelligence"
     the students came up with. Among the different perspectives on
     AI, I'm looking forward to philosophy and history.

**** References

     <<forbes2019>> Bhageshpur, K (15 Nov 2019). Data Is The New Oil
     -- And That's A Good Thing". In: Forbes. [[https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/11/15/data-is-the-new-oil-and-thats-a-good-thing/][Online: forbes.com.]]

     <<penner2021>> Penner J (18 Feb 2021). First People, then
     Process, Product = Profits. [[https://medium.com/the-soul-of-startups/first-people-then-process-product-profits-e1a20ed34189][Online: medium.com.]]

     <<weinberger2010>> Weinberger, D (2 Feb 2010). The Problem with
     the Data-Information-Knowledge-Wisdom-Hierarchy. In: Harvard
     Business Review. [[https://hbr.org/2010/02/data-is-to-info-as-info-is-not][Online: hbr.org.]]

** Week 2 - 26 August

   #+attr_html: :height 300px
   [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/img/bardot.gif]]

   * Housekeeping
   * Four approaches to AI
   * Major issues
   * Next week: essays!

*** Housekeeping

    * Protocol ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/2_what_is_ai/protocol_23_aug.md][GitHub]])
    * Bookmarks ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/ai482/blob/main/bookmarks.md][GitHub]])
    * Missing sessions:
      - Google meet? (Poll: Y/N)
      - Agendas will be posted

* DSC 482.02 Data modeling
** Follow-up  17 Aug

   I write a follow-up whenever I said stuff, or put stuff on the
   board that emerged during a session. I upload it to GitHub where
   you can comment, ask further, remind me of something I promised and
   forgot, or raise any other issue. This may show up in the weekly
   tests (and then also in the final exam, which is sourced from the
   tests). I'll demonstrate GitHub and how to work with it in the
   first week.

   Don't worry about the amount (or type) of information contained
   herein: I write these things up partly for myself, and partly for
   those interested, but I don't expect you to learn or know them at
   any point during this class. And I'll cease writing them up when I
   run out of time, which I often do towards the end of term.

   As part of your term project, you will come across a lot of new
   technical terms. To sort through them, you'll need to create a
   glossary. These follow-ups are my glossary for the course.

   ([[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1rTELJCyH9nvk4zynuzOyWztCVxWOwuta?usp=sharing][Whiteboard]])

*** "Kabelsalat"
    German for "cable spaghetti". No need to know that!
*** [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ising_model][The Ising model]]
    The model was actually developed at the University of Hamburg
    where I studied physics, too. My [[http://www-library.desy.de/diss96.html][diploma (Master) thesis]] was
    concerned with counting graphs on a 4-dimensional hypercubical
    lattice. Such lattices can be used to simulate quantum field
    theories. This was a pretty difficult time for me, partly for
    personal, partly for professional reasons (I may say more in
    class), and it also was a difficult political time (the Berlin
    wall was opened that winter). The 4d Ising model has not been
    solved analytically (neither has the 3d model).
*** Social network analysis
    This is an active area of research (cp. [[crane18][Crane, 2018]]). It is
    linked to a number of different mathematical and computational
    disciplines, like graph theory (e.g. to classify and count the
    number of nodes and connections in a network), probability theory
    (esp. combinatorics and statistics), and databases (to store
    network information, much of which is unstructured, one can use
    so-called graph databases like [[https://neo4j.com/sandbox/][~neo4j~]]). Social networks are
    especially intriguing because of the rich interactions between
    network members (compared to e.g. a parallel computing network),
    and because of the Big Data that are generated.
*** Parametrization
    We briefly discussed a paper called "Predicting Tie Strength With
    Social Media" ([[gilbert09][Gilbert and Karahalios, 2009]]). I recommend that you
    take a look at this paper - it's relevant and readable even for
    beginners. When reading research papers, keep my FAQ "[[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/org/blob/master/FAQ.md#org1c34cd3][How should
    you read?]]" in mind. The paper parametrizes social media data for
    analysis: this means that the researchers identified many
    different variables in order to characterize tie strength. The ACM
    website for the article also comes with a [[https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1518701.1518736][video]] of the original
    presentation of the paper - worth checking out for curiosity!
*** Incubator
    An incubator is a place to grow startup businesses. It can be run
    by, or near a school or business - e.g. in the case of my last
    university, the incubator was housed in a large old factory
    building owned by SIEMENS and supported by it. Startups are like
    hatchlings, they need a lot of tender love and care to make it
    (and most don't nevertheless, in fact) - and money, usually
    provided by venture capitalists. Marc Andreessen is one of the
    most influential venture capitalists - he was also one of the
    creators of the first web browser ([[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosaic_(web_browser)][Mosaic]] - then a start-up, or
    rather a spin-off, of a National computing center in Illinois).
*** Agile methods
    "Kanban" is the Japanese word for "sign". It stands for a simple
    "agile" method (in the technical sense) of organizing tasks on a
    board using post-its or other means. An app that implements the
    Kanban principle for private users is Trello. Kanban boards -
    often analog rather than digital - are common in production
    (e.g. to keep an overview of warehouse stock). In the course, you
    will use the agile method "Scrum" for your project work. Agile
    methods are widely used in industry and software engineering.
*** Multigrid methods
    Many physical systems exhibit symmetries - this means that under
    symmetry operations, the system behaves invariantly (it does not
    change). Imagine a vector in 2d-space: it is invariant against
    any non-rotational movements: length and angle remain the
    same. Symmetry operations often form mathematical groups. One of
    these groups is the renormalization group (RG). It is used in
    quantum field theory to describe the scaling behavior of quantum
    fields. Recently, it has also be used in connection with [[https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.06157][neural
    nets and machine learning]]. But to exploit these symmetries for
    large-scale numerical computations requires algorithmic tricks -
    the multigrid is one such trick - this is what I was researching
    for my PhD in computational mathematical particle physics. I was
    also taking care of a [[https://www.desy.de/user/projects/MG.html][virtual library]] for the development of
    these algorithms.
*** Somatization
    This stands for the human ability to express mental and emotional
    issues through the body. I gave an example from my own career that
    also lead me to coaching (because, as a young, inexperienced,
    nerdy team leader, I needed it), to psychotherapy. Psychotherapy
    is bigger than coaching, and usually reserved for the mentally
    challenged. Frankly, it's too difficult for me - coaching is
    not. Nevertheless, I trained in a few therapeutic disciplines,
    like Gestalt therapy, Psychodrama, and Client-centered therapy.
*** Gestalt
    "Gestalt" is the German word for "shape". It refers to what you're
    focusing on, e.g. when looking at [[http://www.myorganisationalbehaviour.com/wp-content/uploads/gestalt-figure-ground.jpg][this image]]: you either see the
    candelaber, or two heads opposite each other. In class, we looked
    at [[https://i.pinimg.com/originals/83/3f/34/833f346d8f26cc0f77417e4a97f49bce.jpg][this classic Gestalt image]] of two women. In therapy, you can
    use Gestalt as a systemic principle (that's an important concept
    for another post or even a lecture) to address people's issues
    when these issues are obstructed by other issues of little
    importance (much like one image is obstructed by the other). Short
    story: in life, as in computing or math, success often depends on
    what you focus on!
*** Scenario method
    This is an important method (in strategic planning) that I may
    present in class, and then we may also do some exercises on
    it. For now, I only drew two orthogonal axes - soft vs. hard
    problems, and liberal arts vs. STEM solutions. Depending on the
    problem/solution pair, you can now place prominent problems in a
    quadrant. For example, the "consciousness" problem is a soft
    problem, because consciousness is not (yet) a measurable quality
    (not even as a binary quality - we don't know if animals are
    conscious, or not, though some of them, think of dolphins, seem
    that way). It is addressed more often than not by fields in the
    liberal arts, e.g. psychology (see, however, this talk by [[penrose17][Penrose,
    2017]]). "Commerce" is also soft, in that it is only indirectly
    measurable (if at all), and therefore hard to plan, and it is
    addressed e.g. by machine learning methods, which are
    STEM. However, all these big ticket items are in practice tackled
    by interdisciplinary sciences - e.g. "business informatics" (the
    field I taught in Germany) for commerce, or "cognitive sciences"
    for consciousness. I only came up with this on the day before our
    lecture, and I thought it would be fun to show on the first day!
*** References
    <<crane18>> [[https://www.routledge.com/Probabilistic-Foundations-of-Statistical-Network-Analysis/Crane/p/book/9781138630154][Crane H (2018). Probabilistic Foundations of
    Statistical Network Analysis. Chapman and Hall (2018).]]

    <<gilbert09>> [[http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wcohen/10-802/gilbert_etal_chi2009_relationshipstrength.pdf][Gilbert E, Karahalios K (2009). Predicting Tie
    Strength With Social Media. Proc. SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors
    in Computing Systems, April 2009: 211-220.]]

    <<penrose17>> [[https://youtu.be/h_VeDKVG7e0][The Artificial Intelligence Channel (5 Sep
    2017). Sir Roger Penrose - How can Consciousness Arise Within the
    Laws of Physics? Online]]

** Follow-up 19 Aug

   ([[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1qmqSFwM8H6Au3IZq11e8qPndNeCXyUOS?usp=sharing][Whiteboards]])

*** Remember words and know concepts

    It may sound trivial and/or tedious to you, but knowing concepts
    and terms, and remembering them is better than having to look them
    up. Being able to look them up is, of course, better than not
    being able to do even that. Learning anything also consists of
    learning a certain number of technical terms. You've probably been
    brought up with Google search, instead of having to go to a book
    shelf or a library, or having to ask a real person. But Google
    does not replace own knowledge - information that you own, and
    that you know you own because you don't have to think twice if
    someone asks you. It is true that there is much less to learn by
    heart in STEM than, say, in poetry, or even in the life sciences
    or medicine. And in future, AI will likely be able to help you
    even more with remembering stuff. But core technical terms and
    concepts aren't just "stuff", they are like scaffold of ideas
    around which the regular stuff is only draped. One of my jobs as a
    teacher is to help you separate the stuff from the scaffold.

    For your presentation, projects, and all that, you need to do some
    semblance of research. When you do that, you should build a
    glossary of terms - definitions that you ideally craft
    yourself. You can also use these definitions in your writing and
    presenting (in other words: a good glossary is a valid research
    result). In fact, Wikipedia is nothing but a giant glossary.

    This is a long explanation why, at the start of a session, I ask
    you if you remember any words or concepts or ideas from the last
    session, and this challenge will also enter the weekly tests that
    you write in class to get back into the topic.

*** System sciences

    The Gestalt principle and many other theories and models -
    e.g. cybernetics, the science of control systems, the mother of
    computer science - are part of the "system sciences", the sciences
    that are concerned with general systems. Another, more current
    descendant is "[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_science][design science]]", which has become a major modern
    research method in information systems. If you're interested, a
    seminal (highly readable) text on this field is "The sciences of
    the artificial" by one of the pioneers of AI ([[simon1996][Simon, 1996]]).

*** Communications of the ACM

    The Associations for Computing Machinery (ACM) founded in 1947 "is
    the world's largest scientific and educational computing society"
    ([[wikipedia][Wikipedia, n.d.]]). Its journal, the [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communications_of_the_ACM][Communciations of the ACM]]
    (CACM) are of special importance to computer scientists or
    informatics people in training, because they are both scientific
    and rigorous, and readable. They're written, I think, primarily
    for professionals in the field, who want to keep abreast of new
    developments, and do not have the time to read a lot of current
    research literature. I appreciate the opinion pieces in CACM
    because they frequently deviate from mainstream views. When
    learning about a new topic, you should always check out CACM.

*** Burndown chart and Scrum
    This tool is perhaps the tool most often adopted by companies that
    use agile development or project management methods like Scrum. It
    is a true depiction of the state of the project: it displays the
    work still to be done vs. the work originally anticipated. The
    work itself is expressed in "story points" (tasks derived from
    so-called user stories, which we will also learn to create in this
    course). There is a close relationship with UML use-case
    diagrams. The graph illustrates the rationale behind working with
    agile methods: you'll be finished with all deliverables before the
    final exam time, and you have an opportunity to distribute your
    efforts equally across the whole term:

    [[./img/energy.jpg]]

*** Modeling languages and tools
    We'll encounter a few diagrammatic modeling languages, like:
    Event-controlled Process Chains (EPC), Business Process Model and
    Notation (BPMN), and Unified Modeling Language (UML). All of these
    have a mathematically exact origin in the so-called [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petri_net][Petri nets]]
    used to model distributed systems of any kind. However, we will
    (for lack of time) not use them directly. If time permits, we'll
    also look at Entity Relationship Diagrams (ERD), which is
    independent of Petri nets, and which is used to design relational
    databases. If I can pull of the deal, we'll be using Signavio by
    SAP for modeling. SAP is a German software company and the world's
    largest provider of so-called Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
    systems. The Signavio work place license is worth ca. US$ 100k per
    seat. Independent of this deal, we have free tools available, like
    UIPath (for Robotic Process Automation - RPA), or Celonis (for
    Process Mining).
*** References

    In this course, references must be consistent and complete. You're
    of course used to that from your liberal arts courses. Consistency
    means that you pick one citation style (I don't care which one) -
    e.g. [[https://apastyle.apa.org/][APA]]. If you use bibliographic software (like Mendeley, or
    Citavi, or Zotero), the software will help you pick a style and
    maintain consistency. Completeness means that every reference (no
    matter if you reference a personal communication, a blog, a book,
    an article, a web page, an image etc.) must have: author, date,
    title and place of publication (no matter if any of these are
    missing - then you should indicate that they're missing). A URL or
    link is not a complete reference (in fact, it's nothing, certainly
    not a place of publication). Partly because you're also liberal
    arts people, I pull no punches in this area and I'll mercilessly
    mark you down for violations of this rule ("consistency and
    completeness"), which may appear formal to you, but which is super
    important, especially in our times of relentless abuse and
    ignorance of intellectual property rights! End of rant!

    <<simon1996>> [[https://monoskop.org/images/9/9c/Simon_Herbert_A_The_Sciences_of_the_Artificial_3rd_ed.pdf][Simon HA (1996). The Sciences of the Artificial. MIT
    Press.]]

    <<wikipedia>> [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_for_Computing_Machinery][Wikipedia (n.d.). Association for Computing
    Machinery [Website]. Online: wikipedia.org.]]

** Msg to Nick Chaney (21 Aug)

   Hello Nick,

   I hope you are well. We've completed the first week pretty much
   only with orientation. If you accepted my invitation to the GitHub
   folder (https://github.com/birkenkrahe/mod482), you can look at the
   Syllabus, the orientation presentation (in [[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/mod482/blob/main/1_overview/1_overview.md#orga55080b][1_overview]]), and the
   follow-up documents (session protocol).

   The only assignment for next week is to read the chapter
   "Many-model thinking" (see update message for how to get the text)
   for classroom discussion. At the start, there'll be a short test on
   last week's stuff, and I'll give a presentation on the topic of
   "decision intelligence" - an overview of the different tools of
   modeling and mining.

   Let me know if you have trouble with any of this.

   I hope this helps and I hope you can come back to class next
   week. Cheers, MB

** Test 1 (Week 2 / Session 3 / 24 Aug)

   This test starts our series of weekly quizzes. The content is
   usually based on content covered in classroom sessions and/or
   assignments - sometimes it will expand it. If in doubt, confused,
   or if you notice a mistake, please leave a comment or contact me!
   In this class, the tests are not part of your grade.

   - Questions may have more than one correct answer
   - You can play the quiz as often as you wish and for an unlimited
     time
   - You can review and change your answers before submission
   - You can see the correct answers upon submission

*** What will you have to do to pass this course?
    * Give a presentation (marked > 50%)
    * Design a process model
    * Write an essay of 5000-8000 words
    * Write an essay of 2500-5000 words (+)
    * Participate in class discussions (+)
    * Answer at least one question per session correctly
    * Complete the final exam with > 50% (+)
    * Answer a Frequently Asked Question (FAQ)
    * Complete weekly practice exercises (+)
*** What is a preprint?
    - An early version of a paper
    - An unpublished scientific paper (+)
    - The first version of a book
    - Another word for 'monograph'
    - A review paper (like a literature review)

*** When are references consistent?
    - All references are formatted in the same citation style (+)
    - Non-Internet references are APA-formatted
    - Internet references all have the same citation format
    - All references are accompanied by web links
*** When are references complete?
    - Author + date + title + place
    - Author + date + title + place + URL (link)
    - Author + date + title + copyright notice
    - Author + date + title + publishing company

*** What does 'IMRaD' mean?
    - Structure formula for scientific publications (+)
    - Introduction, Method, Results, and Discussion
    - Introduction, Meaning, Results, and Debate
    - Intervention, Method, Results, and Discussion
    - An Internet of Things term

** Week 2 - 24 August

   #+attr_html: :height 400px
   [[~/OneDrive/2021_Fall/img/keaton.gif]]

   * Housekeeping
   * "Many-model thinking"
   * Why Model? - "REDCAPE"
   * Next week: essay topics!

*** Housekeeping

    * First weekly test ([[https://lyon.schoology.com/assignment/5227019586/assessment_questions][Schoology]])
    * Reading assignment ([[https://www.amazon.com/Model-Thinker-What-Need-Know/dp/B08WHN4M7S]["The Model Thinker"]])
    * Delayed Schedule ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/mod482/blob/main/syllabus.md#schedule-and-session-content][GitHub]])
    * FAQ: ask questions! ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/mod482/blob/main/FAQ.md][GitHub]])
    * Term Diary ([[https://github.com/birkenkrahe/org/blob/master/diary.md#org3b0dc9e][GitHub]])
    * Questions?

* Footnotes

[fn:5]In the 1960s, fuelled by Chomsky's studies, it was believed that
there was a universal grammar of all languages. Figuring it out meant
that one could, for example, build an automatic translator
easily. This formalization of language has since turned out to be a
complete dead-end street. A few years ago, Chomsky and other prominent
linguists admitted that there were today, more than 50 years later,
still had no clue what language really is or where it came from
([[hauser14][Hauser et al, 2014]]).

[fn:4]Another useful search engine is ScienceDirect - not for
preprints but for properly published scientific articles and
books. See for example the result for "[[https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/neuroscience/turing-test][Turing Test]]".

[fn:3]This protocol is an example protocol to see how it could be
done. However, you should feel free to define your own format - the
simple instruction is to reflect upon a classroom session and submit
the protocol within one week from the session. The protocol does not need to be complete, or
elegant, or have any particular length. You can put a lot or little
time into it. Your effort will or course be reflected in the
grade. The mandatory protocol makes up 15% of your grade. For
additional protocols, you can get extra credit.

[fn:2] Though there are isolated achievements of AGI, like when a
machine (Deep Blue) beat the world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, or
when the IBM Watson won Jeopardy!, or when Google's Alpha Go beat the
best Go player in the world.

[fn:1]This way of updating the code is not, of course, in the spirit
of version control. It would be better if every collaborator created a
branch of the file, updated it, and merged it with the original. In
this way, the software would take over highlighting of conflicts etc.x
